# ACP-HAFR: Anticancer Peptides Classification Using Long Short-Term Memory with High-Accuracy Feature Representation

Cancer poses a significant challenge due to its intricate nature, variability, and diverse array of causes. Despite being a focal point of research for many years, our understanding of cancer remains limited. Consequently, there is an imperative need for comprehensive therapeutic approaches. Among the potential treatment avenues, anticancer peptides (ACPs) show great promise. However, the large-scale identification and synthesis of these peptides present an ongoing challenge, necessitating the development of dependable prediction methods. Contemporary methods provide low accuracy and use high-dimensional feature-sets like Composition of the K-Spaced Amino-Acid Pairs (CKSAAP). To improve the performance and computational efficiency, herein, we present a long-short-term-memory (LSTM) based classification approach using a new set of features. The proposed feature-set is composed of two contemporary and three novel feature extraction techniques. The contemporary feature-set includes the binary profile feature and k-mer sparse matrix of the reduced amino acid alphabet. Whereas, novel features are derived using the combination of Composition of the K-Spaced Side Chain Pairs (CKSSCP), the Composition of the K-Spaced Electrically Charged Side Chain Pairs (CKSECSCP), and the combination of [pk(CO2H)] + [pk(NH2)] + [pk(R)] + [Isoelectric point]. The combined feature-set is used for the training of LSTM model. The experiments are conducted on benchmark datasets using k-fold cross-validation approach and results concluded that the model outperformed other ACP classification methods with high accuracy and Mathew’s-correlation-coefficient (MCC). In particular, for the ACP740 dataset with 5-folds, we achieved an MCC score of 74.61% which is 7.61%, 2.61% and 10.61% percent higher compared to ACP-KSRC, ACP-MHCNN and ACP-DA methods. As for the ACP344 dataset with 10-folds, we achieved an MCC score of 85.14% which is 0.14%, 23.14% and 2.14% percent higher compared to ACP-KSRC, ACP-DL and SAP methods. With the superior classification performance this proposed model could help in identifying novel ACPs and might also be beneficial in understanding structural and chemical aspects.